# Lesson 0 - A SIMPL Programming Language

> **New to these lessons?** Check out [GETTING_STARTED.md](GETTING_STARTED.md) for instructions on how to fork the repository and set up your development environment!

## Intro

I set out to make this language as a bit of a challenge. I wanted to see if I had the chops to make a programming
language. I had a brief overview in school, but never really *knew* how progamming languages worked. My first attempts
at markdown parsers failed, and I dropped them like they were hot. After I had a working prototype in SIMPL, I started
to see areas where it was actually useful. It made me want more, so I kept adding features. I want to share my learnings
and share my journey, so others can feel what I've felt. The satisfaction that comes from creating something we as programmers use every day, from scratch.

Now, there are some great, I mean **great** tutorials out there, on how to write a lanugage from scratch. But it's not for everyone, 
and it can be a daunting feat, also, sometimes it's way more fun to work on something that already does stuff. 
So you can play around and learn how it does stuff.

I had an idea to write out some exercises that would help people get 
going with contributing to the SIMPL project. In turn learning about how programming languages work, and getting a 
taste of some modern C++ development. The intentions of the exercise is to introduce the concept, explain a bit
about the implementation, and give an example exercise.

I'm a huge proponent of unit testing, so I'm going to be using that as my main area for exercises. I believe
it teaches modular programming, as well as other beneficial thinking patterns. I'm not the best at it, but 
it's a good place to start! 

## Exercise 0 

You shouldn't need much more than a Windows machine and Visual Studio 2019 with the C++ loadout. Start
by cloning the repo. Go ahead and open the solution `simpl.sln` and feel free to peruse the code. I've set the solution in the 
following manner:

- `simpl`        -> the core components, includes, etc... 
- `simpl.repl`   -> the REPL (Read Execute Print Loop), I use this project to run my `.sl` files when I'm testing. The first argument of the REPL can be a file, and it'll execute the file. Otherwise, it works as a REPL.
- `simpl.syntax` -> a very, and I mean very, basic syntax highlighter project for Visual Studio
- `simpl.test`   -> the unit test project

You should be able to right click build on `simpl.test` and run the tests. Take a look at what I have for tests. It's not much, but it's a start.

*Note* You'll need to the Visual Studio Extension load-out installed to be able to build the syntax project.


Now, let's get you running your first piece of SIMPL.

SIMPL comes with a REPL which stands for Read-Execute-Print-Loop; the REPL will also interpret a file passed in through the command line.

Two ways you can execute:

1) Run the REPL project, then type
    ```
        > @import io
        > print("hello world");
    ```
2) Right click simpl.repl -> Properties, and set Command Arguments to:
    `..\examples\hello_world.sl`

You should see hello world in the console.

## Your First Contribution

Now that you've run some SIMPL code, let's make your first contribution to the repository! You're going to create your own SIMPL program and add it to the examples folder.

### Task: Create a Personal Greeting Program

Create a new file called `greeting.sl` in the `examples` folder with the following requirements:

1. Import the `io` library
2. Create a variable with your name
3. Print a personalized greeting message
4. Use at least one arithmetic operation (e.g., calculate your age in days or months)
5. Print the result of your calculation

Here's a skeleton to get you started:

```simpl
@import io

# Your code here
let name = "YourName";

# Add your greeting and calculations
```

**Example output:**
```
Hello, Alice!
I am approximately 10950 days old.
That's 262800 hours!
```

Once you've created your program:
1. Test it by running it through the REPL
2. Make sure it runs without errors
3. Add the file to git: `git add examples/greeting.sl`
4. Commit your change: `git commit -m "Add personal greeting example"`

Congratulations! You've completed lesson 0 and made your first contribution to the repository!


## Next
[Lesson 1](https://github.com/mvpete/simpl/blob/master/lessons/L1.md)



## Further reading
[Crafting Interpreters](https://craftinginterpreters.com/)