# Lesson 1 - Anatomy


## Intro 
There's a lot that goes into a programming language. You've got the grammar of the language, the rules of the 
language, then the platform on which the platform runs and executes. 

I wanted SIMPL to be just that, simple. I wanted it to exemplify the standard division of responsibility that
they teach about in the compiler books. Lofty goal. Here's an illustration of what I mean, typically with a programming
language the pipeline is basically like this:

The code (a character string) => Lexer (Tokenizer) => Parser => AST => Output

## The Tokenizer  

The tokenizer is the first step in the pipeline. Its responsibility is to chop up that long string of characters,
otherwise known as your program, into chunks known as tokens. The character '+' (decimal 43) is just a '+', it has
really no meaning. The tokenizer assigns the first bit of meaning to the otherwise meaningless string of characters.
The tokenizer iterates over the string, looking at each character, and scanning forward to chunk the string into
tokens. 

For instance the following string `"foo + bar"`, could tokenize into:

`{ type: identifer, text: "foo" }{ type: whitespace, text: " " }{ type: operator, text: "+" }{ type: identifer, text: "bar" }`

You'll find the code for the tokenizer in `simpl/tokenizer.h`.

In SIMPL, a token has a type, along with a pointer to the begining and end of the characters in that token. The tokenizer's
single responsibility is to tokenize, it doesn't know anything about the rules of the language, other than the tokens. Its
output is just a string of tokens.


**Side note:** 
A good exercise to warm up to writing
the components of a programming language is a simple mathematic expression solver. Something that can basically
solve 1 + 2 => 3. A calculator really. This little exercise will help to build a tokenizer as you go about recogizing
the tokens in the equation.